history TV all weekend every weekend on
c-span 3 next on American history TV
researcher Peter corn blue discusses
President Kennedy's attempts to open up
private channels of communication with
Cuba after the Bay of Pigs invasion he
describes the people tasked with the
operation and the issues involved with
establishing reliable dialogue and
negotiations mr. Kornbluth the co-author
of back-channel to Cuba he spoke at a
conference marking the 50th anniversary
of the release of the Warren Report
hosted by the assassination archives and
research center this is about 45 minutes
thank you and I am here to introduce
Peter Kornblum who I have just met and
excuse me I have to go here I've just
gotten a copy of his new just gotten a
copy of his new book which is coming out
on October the 1st on Wednesday so you I
don't think you can buy them here yet is
that correct I'm sorry but your local
bookstores will all have an Amazon I
presume FFF thank you my name is Brenda
Brody and I've been on the board since
about since 2005 and Jim and I can't
identify the exact year so that's as
close as I can get the National Security
Archive Peter corn blues home base was I
believe the first organization to be
known publicly as NSA I just want to
clarify that his organization is what I
call the good NSA the NSA I call the
other NSA is the National Security
Agency and they're the ones who listen
to our private phone calls and read our
mail and are a core component of our
secret government that has for decades
done everything possible to fight FOIA
suits and deny legitimate requests for
access to their historic records
Peter corn blue and his good NSA as well
as the assassination archives Research
Center of course has for decades been in
the forefront of filing requests and
occasionally legal suits to obtain deke
classification a release up highly
classified and hidden documents the role
of both the good NSA and AARC
is chasing our historic records
relentlessly trying to pry open the
hidden hands of the bad NSA and CIA and
most of the covert agencies and more
frequently now unfortunately our
National Archives that continued to veil
public records behind layers of
classification and secrecy
Peter Korn brew has been responsible for
two major projects at the good NSA and
has managed to extract substantive
records for both this is my definition
of a hero he's obtained vital records of
the Nixon Kissinger overthrow of the
first Chilean government in 1973 and his
book on that topic several years ago was
entitled the pen Ashok Pinochet file a
Declassified dossier on atrocity and
accountability the documents read like
the outline for a lake air a novel to me
and he's also obtained many of the
documents generated during before and
after some of the u.s. attempts to
overthrow the Cuban government in 1998
he wrote that was that a book that was a
page-turner for researchers that was
entitled the Bay of Pigs to classify the
secret report of the invasion of Cuba
and here's the sequel coming out soon to
be I presume but also to television
experience and their hope the big screen
whoops and though it took years he's
extracted four of the five volumes of
the most important history of the
development of Cuban American history
politics policy strategies propaganda
and PSYWAR that led to the disaster that
was the Bay of Pigs this history was
written by Jack Pfeifer as CIA historian
who has had access to many but nowhere
near all of the documents generated by
key CIA components and the groups and
consultants from all branches of
government that they were
worked with what was most fascinating to
me is that these volumes confirm that
the most important decisions about the
development of us attempts to oust fast
cast Fadel and supply aus approved
government to replace him some of the
most important were made by a small
group of top officers within CIA most
working from Angleton shops from the
Navy and elsewhere in the Pentagon here
we go
and many key decisions were taken
without the knowledge of either
President Eisenhower or Canada by the
late 70s I've been cramming on Cuban
history from was 20 years and came
across the man I've spent more time with
than my husband or my children his name
was William Pauley I've gotten to know
him probably better than any of his
either of his wives or any of the other
women in his life I learned he was an
inveterate liar chief thief fraud draft
dodger traitor and much more and a
brilliant con man whose sole shang-chi
shock his Air Force was connected to
airline activity through Latin America
and thence became ambassador to first
Peru and then Brazil and used his titles
to meet greet and squeeze some of the
important very regimen Everett rich men
everywhere he played his connections on
cash with very top Republicans including
President Eisenhower and the Dulles
brothers to get himself up to his
propellers in top top-level planning he
was very deeply involved in CIA's plan
to overthrow the first democratic
elected government in Guatemala but
President Truman seems to have pulled up
the CIA short and it was held over until
the Dulles brothers arrived with the
Eisenhower Nixon administration and
Pauli was welcome in the light house
like most people like
like most people here I have to here we
go hold on like most people here I also
totally dependent on documents and it
wasn't until Peter Korn blue unearthed
and dug out and obtained volume four of
the five volume set of historical
commentaries on the Bay of Pigs written
by CIA historian Jack Pfeifer did I
confirm the extraordinarily powerful
positions Paulie held and the roles he
played in the count intelligence
operations leading up to and during the
Bay of Pigs these volumes are gold mines
for everyone with any historical
interest from the end of World War two
to now and mine drew these in these
volumes it's clear that dr. Pfeiffer had
materials withheld from him that he
recognized some places where he was
played by his managers and others where
he was deliberately lied to this is
probably why CIA continues to refuse to
turn over volume 5 2 Peter corn blew the
good NSA and the AR AR C and the rest of
us if you believe that they refuse to
beliefs it release it because it's just
a draft which is what they say it is
there are pages in these same volumes 5
volumes that are stamped draft and there
are any number of other records
elsewheres
draft draft that have been Declassified
and released what are they hiding
another former CIA historian has
recently attacked Pfeiffer and what she
was to be an attempt to diminish vol 5
in the event it's ever to be released
contrary to rumors floating that
Pfeiffer was the CIA sink event I don't
think so
volume 4 makes it pretty clear that
Pfeiffer realized and made clear that a
knew damn well some of what was held
withheld from him and he didn't think it
was pretty let's everyone here give
Peter corn blue and Jim Lazar the
present they deserve for working so long
and so hard for all of us and send
letters to Nara asking them why they are
seeding to CIA requests that volume 5
should not be declassified and released
we do know that this is accurate
because Nara actually sent a letter to
Jim that says so so with nothing for her
Peter is going to now talk about the
what happened from the documents
viewpoint in Cuba I'm delighted to be
known as the good NSA that's as opposed
to the bad NSA we we realize that our
the name of our organization when it's
reduced to an acronym and its initials
is very confusing and many people out in
the world hear National Security Archive
and they believe that we are the library
or the CIA and I have to go around
telling audiences that we are the
antithesis of the librarians or
archivists of the CIA we're the good NSA
and we have a revolutionary slogan
documents or death and that that that
distinguishes me rather quickly from
anybody thinking that I'm a undercover
CIA person posing as an archivist I'm
going to talk about we're going to talk
about the Bay of Pigs volume and the
issue of the efforts to get to get that
material Declassified through a little
question-and-answer between me and
Brenda in a few minutes but what I
wanted to talk about this morning is the
chapter on on Kennedy in the new book
back channel to Cuba and Kennedy's back
channels to to Cuba I think you'll find
although some of you are familiar with
the contours of this history I think
you'll find that the book contains more
details than any other place on this
rather fascinating history you know that
the Kennedy assassination of course has
intrigued us all it intrigues me as a
historian of us-cuban relations for many
many reasons one of which is that this
hidden history
Kennedy's efforts to reach out to Fidel
Castro is so counter to the kind of
known image of him of giving the green
light to the to the Bay of Pigs invasion
of pushing through his brother for
Operation Mongoose etc etc and so the
flip side of the coin
what National Security Council documents
are referred to as the suite approach
has always intrigued me but of course
the most intriguing thing about the
Kennedy assassination is a historical
coincidence although I know there people
in the room that don't think it's a
coincidence of the very moment that John
F Kennedy was killed at the very moment
that he was killed there was a CIA
officer in Paris meeting with a
high-level mole inside the Cuban
military and attempting to pass him a
poison pen to assassinate Fidel Castro
and at that very same moment Kennedy
John F Kennedy had an emissary in Cuba a
French journalist meeting with Jean
Danielle Morenci journalist named Jean
Danielle meeting with Fidel Castro at a
safe house in Varadero beach having
lunch with him
fresh fish brought by the fishermen for
them and an aide comes in and says turn
on the radio the president has been shot
in Dallas and the mission of Jean
Danielle to pass what he called a
message of peace from John F Kennedy to
Fidel Castro was aborted at that very
moment so it's an intriguing set of
circumstances that certainly calls on us
to think through what really happened
for many many years almost 30 years the
Jean Danielle story was the only story
that was really known about Kennedy's
efforts to approach Castro he wrote
about it in the New York Times only a
few weeks after Kennedy was killed he
had a front-page story
he also wrote a two-part article in The
New Republic in which he detailed his
role as a special
boy but over the course of time we were
able to get a Kennedy administration
file Declassified it was called special
contacts with Cuban leaders and it
revealed a whole set of efforts to reach
out and communicate with Castro about
changing the contours of us-cuban
relations in the wake of the very
dangerous Cuban Missile Crisis let me
just go back to of course what we all
remember the political climate of the
day we had the Bay of Pigs invasion
we had the trade embargo and it's
aftermath
we had Robert Kennedy overseeing
operation Mongoose and assassination
attempts and all sorts of coordinated
pressures and of course then there were
the just the famous efforts to overthrow
Fidel Castro but interesting enough out
of these efforts of aggression came the
first opportunities for actual contact
and a kind of a rebuilding of the of the
broken bridges that destroyed bridges
and us-cuban relations publicly we had
and over and covert nastiness against
Cuba particularly in the aftermath of
the Bay of Pigs and the Missile Crisis
but in the aftermath of the missile
crisis some of Kennedy's aides noted
that the Missile Crisis ended badly for
Fidel Castro yeah and his relationship
with the Soviet Union Soviet Union
pulled the missiles out of Cuba without
actually consulting him he had been
willing to sacrifice his whole country
for the socialist bloc and their right
to defend themselves and here the Nikita
Khrushchev hadn't even talked to him
before agreeing with Kennedy that he
would secretly swap the missiles in Cuba
for u.s. missiles in in Turkey and so
the issue was whether Fidel would be so
angry at the Soviets and he was very
angry at them that we might seize that
opportunity and entice him to come back
to us and there was a shift in Kennedy's
thinking and it was helped by the fact
that he started negotiation
secret negotiations with the Cubans to
free the Bay of Pigs prisoners I went to
McGeorge Bundy and interviewed him just
I don't know five or six months before
he passed away in the theater late 1990s
and I asked him you know why did Kennedy
reach out to to the Cubans and he said
well you know there was this breach with
the Soviet Union Kennedy was a smart guy
he thought he could explore bringing
Cuba back into the Western orbit and he
wanted to see what could be done but as
Bundy said you know we had no Department
of peaceful tricks we only had a
Department of dirty tricks and the issue
was the issue was how do you do this you
know what mechanism since it was too
politically sensitive to actually have
an open meeting with you know Castro how
did you do this and the answer became
through the man who was negotiating the
release of the Bay of pit of the more
than 1,000 Bay of Pigs prisoners James
Donovan a famous New York lawyer and
Donovan conducted what Kissinger would
later call shuttle diplomacy
he kept flying back and forth from Miami
to Havana meeting with Castro starting
in the early fall of 1962 a break in the
action during the Missile Crisis and
then a flurry of shuttle diplomacy in
December of 1962 which resulted in a
trade of sixty-two million dollars of
food and medicines for the actual
prisoners and at the very moment that
the prisoners were being loaded onto a
series of planes at Christmas Eve the
CIA called up Donovan and said you know
we have three agents in Castro's jails
three American agents from the Technical
Services Division they had been planting
eavesdropping devices in the ceiling of
the new China News Agency that was being
built in
in Havana Wayne Smith remembers this
because he was he was there when they
were arrested and you know they were
they bungled the whole operation they
were a rented apartment above the actual
agency and they were just drilling holes
in the ceiling and planting these
devices and the Cubans were on to them
and arrested them threw them in jail and
there were about 25 other Americans who
had been rounded up after the Revolution
for counter subversion activities and
they were in Cuban jails also in the CIA
basically said to Donovan get all these
guys out and Donovan said will you
release these prisoners along with the
Bay of Pigs prisoners and Castro said no
but if you come back in January we can
start to talk about that and that really
was the beginning of talks between Cuba
and the United States under the Kennedy
administration Donovan came back in
January he came back in March he came
back in April to negotiate the early
release of these Americans Castro
thought they were all CIA agents as far
as he was concerned three of them
actually were bonafide CIA agents and
eventually Donovan arranged a prisoner
swap for Cubans who had been arrested
here in the United States including one
who had by accident shot a nine-year-old
girl in the back and killed her and had
been convicted and put in jail in New
York for about 27 US citizens in Cuban
jails three of whom were the CIA agents
and it was in the middle of these talks
as they culminated that Castro said how
would we restore normally normal
relations with the United States of
America and Donovan said to him mr.
premier do you know how porcupines make
love that Castro turned to his
translator Rene Vallejo and said we're
quest Beno siendo a lot more cancer so
porcupines making love what the hell is
that and he said the answer was no he
didn't know how they made love and
Donovan said very carefully
and that is how you in the United States
will begin to discuss restoring
relations I will help and do the best
that I can with that and Donovan came
back with this message that Kennedy was
interested the captor was interested in
better relations and you know curiously
the bureaucracy then kind of went into
overdrive for instructions for him they
wanted him to go back to Cuba and tell
Castro that if he severed his
relationship with the Soviet Union and
he made it clear that he was pulling all
of his agents out of the rest of Latin
America then we could talk to him about
better relations and this proposal for
these instructions were brought to the
President of the United States and this
document I think is probably the key
document when I found this document in
the in the Kennedy Library I felt that
it was clearly the most important
document of the the Kennedy
administration from March of 1963 with
the President of the United States
overruling his aides on these
restrictive instructions and basically
saying look we want to have better
relations with a guy don't give him a
set of preconditions that he's not going
to meet let's be more flexible on this
and by the way I'm damned interested in
making this happen so let's let's go
forward and it's a quite an interesting
quite an interesting document there was
an aide in the National Security Council
who really deserves tremendous credit
Gordon Chase he personally wanted to see
better relations with Cuba he kept
peppering bundi his boss with these
wonderful memos and then Bundy would
pass these on in the in high-level
meetings with with with with the
president and basically Bundy concluded
as he told the president that a Tito as
Castro was not inconceivable and a full
diplomatic revolution would not be the
most extraordinary event in the
twentieth century and you know as he put
it caster or others currently high in
the regime might find advantage and a
gradual shift away from
present level of dependence on Moscow in
the United States and Cuba on Strictly
economic terms have much to gain from
reestablishment of of relations and so
at the very highest levels even though
the ninety percent of the National
Security bureaucracy was certainly
against this some feelers started to go
forward this was the pivotal memo that
Gordon Chase wrote where he basically
said we look we haven't really looked
explored we've explored the covert
nastiness and the over pressures but we
haven't explored the suite approach that
might entice Castro back to us he had
this whole PR plan it won't be a
headline that the US accommodates with
Castro it'll be you know Castro eject
Soviet Union from Western Hemisphere
you know US pulls Cuba back into Western
orbit this was the kind of headline and
spin that he that that he put on it
James Donovan passed the baton of being
an intermediary to an extraordinary
reporter from ABC News it was a woman
named Lisa Howard and does anybody in
the room actually remember seeing her on
television in the early 60s she was the
most famous female journalist of her
time she was the first female
correspondent for ABC News she was the
first female to have her own news show
she's been called the first Barbara
Walters because her whole scheme just
like Barbara's was to find powerful
world leaders and interview them and
make a lot of headlines with that and
her first major interview is with Nikita
Khrushchev 1960 when he came to the UN
and then she set her sights on Fidel
Castro and began peppering the Cuban
mission in New York to let her go to
Cuba with a camera crew and interview
fidel fidel had not given any major
interviews to american television since
1959 this was now 1963 and she finally
got permission to go in april of 63 and
then of course as anybody as Wayne Smith
will tell you and anybody else has tried
to see Castro it's it's hard to get to
him
and finally after being there waiting
for three weeks
she went to Donovan who was there on his
last trip and said please broker an
introduction and he went to Castro and
he said mr. premier there's a beautiful
blonde dish of a reporter wanting to see
you I highly recommend that you spend
some time with her and Castro gave her
this interview the night before he flew
off to Moscow for a month to restore his
relations with the Soviet Union and he
also spent some time talking to her
privately and when she came back she
shared what he said privately with of
course the CIA they were waiting for her
at the airport in Miami when she landed
they debriefed her and they immediately
sent a memo Richard Helms who figures in
all of our discussions at this
conference immediately sent a memo to
the president if you look up in the
corner there it would be to your right
where that little handwritten PS aw is
that that was the mark that Kennedy's
secretary wrote on every document that
he actually saw presidents saw and in
the original document it's in blue ink
and it's quite striking and this is the
debriefing report from Lisa Howard and
she made it clear Fidel Castro really
feels that we could have better
relations with the United with he
couldn't have better relations with the
United States we need an intermediary I
will volunteer to do this or James
Donovan could do it or Adlai Stevenson
could do it but he's willing to to work
on this and that was his first feeler
now this document how many of you have
seen this document before one to Geoff
Morley seeing it anybody else
well this document of course is fodder
for for some of the issues of motivation
when it comes to the CIA and Kennedy of
course the CIA opposed this idea of a
rapprochement with Cuba and John McCone
made his feelings about it felt
immediately the memo to Kennedy on Lisa
Howard went
day before this one on May 1st and on
May 2nd as mecon was leaving the country
he called his office and issued an edict
send everybody in the White House this
one paragraph letter saying we don't
like this idea because it's gonna if it
ever leaked it would undermine
everything that we've been working
towards in Latin America you know all
the exiles we work with would accuse us
of betrayal the latin-american countries
who we've been bribing and pressuring to
to distance themselves from from Cuba
would call us hypocrites
the whole kit and caboodle of our of our
approach so don't go there
but you know over the course of time key
officials William Atwood who was a
deputy UN Ambassador Lisa Howard worked
with the Cuban ambassador at the UN to
start passing messages back and forth
and finally Lisa Howard got impatient
and she organized what I call the first
episode of cocktail diplomacy cocktail
diplomacy between Cuba and the United
States it was very interesting for me in
my research I went to this man Carlos
lechuga in Cuba to interview him about
this history and I said so how did this
start he said well you know the United
States approached us and asked us to
engage in this diplomacy and then of
course we interviewed in my interview
with Bundy and others that were still
alive they said well Cuba Cuba asked us
reached out to us and so both both sides
were saying well we were approached and
the truth that matter is it was this
extraordinary in the hoods but this
extraordinary woman Lisa Howard who
wanted to see this I wanted to see
movement in us-cuban relations
she went to lechuga and she said the
United States wants to talk to you the
opportunity is at my house my Central
Park apartment tonight at a cocktail
party and she went to Atwood and she
said Cuba wants to talk to you get
permission from Adlai Stevenson to come
to my house and meet with Carlos lechuga
kind of under the guise of
of a cocktail party you guys can go off
in the corner and that's what they did
they went off in the corner
they talked bill Atwood told the chuga
that the CIA was basically running you
Cuba policy lucas said you know feet i
would like to meet with somebody you
could fly secretly down to to Cuba and
this started in the fall of 1963
a countdown of diplomacy there's an
extraordinary audiotape on November 5th
of bundy going into Kennedy's office and
the taping system goes on and bundy says
you know the cubans have reached out to
atwood and they've and they've offered a
secret meeting in cuba should we send
him and kennedy says yeah you know we
could send him but we had to privatise
him we have to create possible denial
maybe we should take him off the payroll
at the UN a month before he goes so that
if it leaks that he went to cuba we can
say that he went on his own and that was
the classic you know discussion for
using back-channel intermediaries
there's a lot of episodes of that exact
kind of scenario in this book
back-channel to cuba using people who
could be plausibly denied if it ever
leaked that they that they went in
atwood was going to be the first this
tape is on the website of the National
Security Archive
it's extraordinary tape if you want to
listen to it I couldn't play it here
know at would did a chronology of his of
his meetings and phone calls with the
Cubans the date of this summary is so
extraordinary November 22nd 1963
he's clearly written this and sent it
over before he gets the news that the
president has been shot in Dallas and
that's the most extraordinary thing
about this history is that there was
this buildup of momentum right in the
last literally first the last kind of
three weeks of the president's life and
then in the last 72 hours
of his life he he authorizes Bundy to
proceed with Atwood Atwood goes to Lisa
Howard's apartment and gets on the phone
with Fidel Castro's top deputy her
apartment had become kind of
communications central and they agree
that there's going to be a meeting that
Cuba's going to send an agenda to the
United Nations the United States doesn't
really decide Kennedy decides he'd
prefer to know have a preliminary
meeting at the UN and he needs to know
what the agenda is what cue is ready to
discuss before he's going to authorize
Atwood to go secretly to Cuba and so all
of these events start to pile up
including two events in the last 72
hours
Kennedy gives a big speech to the inner
american press corps on cuba in which he
kind of issues kind of a subtly the
conditions where he basically says you
know if Cuba did this in this we really
think we could live with the Cuban
Revolution and it was intended to send a
message knowing that these other things
were going on and then of course Jean
Danielle goes to Cuba carrying this
message he arrives on the 20th of
November meets with Fidel for the first
time conveys a message then they have a
second meeting on the 22nd and continue
to talk about this and and they meet
obviously having an animated
conversation and Fidel is extremely
positive about Kennedy's message he
starts talking about how Kennedy could
become the most famous president in
history because he would be the one that
understood that the socialist bloc and
the capitalist bloc's could actually
live together and coexist together on
kind of equal footing in a peaceful way
and not in a way of aggression now of
course this raises all sorts of issues
of what-ifs
lisa howard went back to cuba in
February of 1964 Fidel talked to her and
talked on camera a little bit obliquely
about the whole issue of Kennedy and
later he would tell the sons of Robert
Kennedy that it's unfortunate that
things happen as they did and that the
president could not do what he wanted to
do it's a dramatic history it's a
history that certainly is a relevant to
the Kennedy administration its relevance
to the assassination is for all of you
to determine but if you want as many
details as you can possibly find on it
the Kennedy chapter in this book is now
available thank you
excuse me is the is the breakdown off
already
no we first I first need to know what
the break
go ahead David David speak step a little
closer okay David Kiser
ah professor corn boat I've researched
this a lot myself and I would have I
would be delighted to be able to say
that I found what you did but it isn't
really what I found it's a question of
interpretation and emphasis and I just
want to take a second to get it across
to begin with you started with those
remarks of Kennedy's in March but in
April the President had a documented
change of heart
oddly enough as a result of a crisis in
Laos where things were heating up and he
said in an NSC meeting why are we easing
up in Cuba when Khrushchev is screwing
us on Laos or words to that effect and
that got the planning for a mixture of
covert action and new Cuban groups
training and going again but and and the
other thing I do want to mention is I
would have loved to say that this was
about to be a success because William
Atwood was both a close personal friend
of my family and essentially a second
father to me but the data on how his
proposal was received which I want to
quote from is shows me something else
and allow me to quote just a second
when McGeorge Bundy brought out words
initiative before the special group on
November 5th those present including
McKown knew Alexis Johnson from State
Vance from defense and the Attorney
General agreed that it would be better
for outward to return to private life
before meeting again with Castro and
they suggested that Vallejo fly to
Mexico City perhaps to meet with US
ambassador Thomas Mann who would not
have been interested RFK also argued the
Castro would have to end the subversive
activities and arranged the evacuation
of all Soviet troops before the United
States could discuss a day taunt on
November 12th Bundy telephone at word in
New York after speaking with the
president
the conversation which you referenced I
called this afternoon with William
Atwood and told him that if the
president's instruction I was conveying
this message orally and not by cable I
told him that the president hoped he
would get in touch with Vallejo to
report that it did not seem practical to
us at this stage to send an American
official to Cuba and that we would
prefer to begin with a visit Bible a
hook to the US where Atwood would be
glad to see him and to listen to any
messages and I did say that etc yes
David I'm sorry all right all right
and and I think the evidence is and it's
followed up in the quote that in fact
they didn't actively want to pursue this
at this time that it was being held as
an option to pursue at some point down
the road and meanwhile as I say the
planning for the assassination of Castro
knew landings in Cuba some mix of events
that would enable them to bring the
overthrow of Castro about was continuing
a pace and at the highest levels well I
can only say what actually happened in
those those final days which was that of
course in in the bureaucracy was 90
percent 95 percent against this and
Robert Kennedy tended to say one thing
in bigger meetings and other things
privately he had to meet his own meeting
with Atwood and was cautiously open to
the the idea of initiative with with
with Cuba
the president is on tape in his own
office not saying don't send him I don't
want to have anything to do with you
tell Castro but saying let's explore how
we could do this safely and the safety
steps were the cautious steps were let's
not just send somebody off without
knowing what we're going to talk about
let's get an agenda from the Cubans sent
up let's have a preliminary meeting in
New York and then let's see how we go
from there and in fact Atwood takes
those instructions and in a telephone
call with Vallejo on the 19th of
November very late in early in the
morning like two o'clock in the morning
at least a Howard's house conveys that
that very information that they're open
to this they need an agenda they need to
know what the Cubans are want to talk
about in the and he can't go to Cuba
safely securely right now but there's
alternatives and the the amazing kind of
irony in coincidence and for me kind of
sadness of this this extraordinary
history science fact that the president
United States is assassin is at the very
moment that he's assassinated
Castro's agenda is being flown up to to
New York and given to the chuga it's a
document that I have not been able to
recover from the Cuban government yet
I'm still working on it but it was one
of those pivotal pieces of evidence that
that we need in order to see what the
cube what Cuba felt it was ready to talk
about it at that very time there is no
doubt though that the assassination of
the President of the United States
aborted a series of efforts on both
sides Cuba and the United States to move
towards some type of official
face-to-face meeting to discuss their
differences
Paul Kunstler Washington DC Peter
you mentioned McGeorge Bundy in your
remarks do you have any knowledge that
McGeorge Bundy might have had prior
knowledge of President Kennedy's
assassination I have no idea of that
whatsoever go ahead over here boy hey my
name is Irving Lee given the
extraordinary presentation by mr. Vichy
on a yesterday it dawned on me the
question I didn't get a chance to ask
was if Rushmore actually did take place
what will the ramifications be and the
trans I asked that question to the
translator yesterday he said the Cassiar
would have been gone and you know we're
all speculating of course but the
question I ask you is if if the rock
brush mode was able to take place what
changes would have been made would have
would have been a split within the Cuban
government on this question with Castro
and Che would have been broken apart by
this this rapprochement what's your
opinions on that what would have changed
with the embargo be eliminated
Che Guevara was actually the Castro's
first emissary to the United to talk to
a US official and I had this famous
discussion with Richard Goodwin and
Montevideo in August of 1961 where che
you know for on behalf of Fidel said you
know we're thank you for the Bay
pigs you turned us into a little
aggrieved country into an equal and
here's a box of cigars and here's a big
box of cigars that's right
yeah we we have an article drawn from
the book coming out in cigar aficionado
in a couple of weeks called cigar
diplomacy yeah how adele Castro used
Cohibas as a weapon of peace and so you
can read about the chick of our story
they're nice but you know the idea that
there was a huge difference of opinion
between Fidel and Che Guevara on these
issues I think is is not accurate it's
something that that Lisa Howard and her
reports and others who met with Castro
played up when they came home but it's
not at all clear that they themselves
had any in-depth knowledge of the
relationship between Jay and and Fidel
certainly there were more hardliners who
in the Cuban government who were opposed
to any effort to improve relations with
the United States but you know Fidel
Castro held all the cards and all the
power in Cuba at that time and certainly
almost all the way up till 2006 when he
was forced to retire from illness and if
he had wanted to do this he would have
done it I don't think it would have
ended his regime in any way I think it
would validate it the Revolution
gentlemen we need to make the most
efficient use of time as possible so
bail go ahead and then dr. Newman bill
sin pitch I wanted to ask if you had
anything on the background of the
arrests of the Cuban officials in New
York in November 62 that were used to
later to swap by Donovan for the CIA
guys in April 63 and I asked because
they were supposedly doing a terror plot
to blow up Macy's and Bloomingdale's in
November 62 and Angleton said later that
they were going after military
facilities I'm going through some
disconnect here well I would I welcome
the the researchers in the room who
spent a lot of time more time than me
looking at those records I think they're
important they're fascinating it's a
perplexing issue did where these guys
arrested for no good reason and charged
falsely so that the United State
have some bargaining power directly on
these for a prisoner swap or and this is
possible did castro send these guys they
had arrived in october did he send them
as part of as part of his contingency
planning on the Missile Crisis he
certainly was worried that the United
States was going to attack Cuba and
perhaps wanted to put in place you know
kind of a you know an effort in in New
York to be able to to respond but they
were they they arrived at a very odd
time in October of 1962 amidst great
tensions with the United States and they
were quickly you know arrested so in the
context of course with the Missile
Crisis and all makes it very difficult
to know whether just by rote the US
government decided they were going to
arrest people who were just are coming
from Cuba at that time because they
might be terrorists or whether they
actually had some some plot dr. Newman
yeah hi Peter I just want to expand on
your answer to the question about
McGeorge Bundy having advanced knowledge
of the assassination I think I agree
with your response and I would add that
if you look at the drafting process of n
Sam 273 which McGeorge Bundy wrote on a
spoke to him about this interviewed
about it it's really clear that even
though they were thinking of escalating
in Vietnam in various ways that he put
language in there that he thought that
his boss President Kennedy could approve
and this was the day before so it
doesn't look like he expected the
president to be dead it really looks
like McGeorge Bundy thought that he was
writing a document today on the 21st
that John Kennedy would be alive to see
dr. Aguilar last question
just a point about the business of there
perhaps having been the dress doctor
kaisers point about there having been to
tracks
pol scott has made the point that that
that governments are always pursuing two
three sometimes even
for tracks and so the fact that you can
document that something was being done
does not mean that something else was
being done at the same time that's the
way it always works and Peter knows that
having been a Canadian diplomat and
having you know worked at high-level you
know political circles himself for much
of his career McGeorge Bundy actually
told me he was they had he had a word
for it wasn't multi-tracking but it was
something similar to that and he
certainly acknowledged that they were
still looking at CIA operations although
truth be told they were limited the
autonomous operations were supposed to
kind of distance the CIA from from these
exiles and let them go off and do their
own thing so that we would be somewhat
less involved but the point was is that
he also that kennedy also wanted to
explore a different route and that route
was under serious exploration at the
moment that he was killed
thank you for coming I one question can
I ask you one question
October the first back channel to Cuba